docs/installation.rst, before:

Installation
============

Obtaining the source code
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The source code can be downloaded from the `GitLab repository <https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem>`_::

   $ git clone https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

Installing from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can build the code from sources on Linux, macOS, or Windows. On Linux and
macOS, you can use either `CMake <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.18/>`_ or our
custom ``Makefile``-based build system.
For Windows, only the CMake-based build system will work.


Build prerequisites
+++++++++++++++++++

- Build tool: either ``make`` or `Ninja <https://ninja-build.org/>`_.
- C++ compiler fully compliant with the `C++17 standard <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/17>`_ and with full support for OpenMP >=4.5 [#f1]_
- Linear algebra libraries implementing the BLAS and LAPACK interfaces (*e.g.* 
  Intel MKL, OpenBLAS or Cray LibSci)
- MPI library (*e.g.* MPICH, Intel MPI or Open MPI)
- Installation of Python >=3.7 that includes the interpreter, the development
  header files, and the development libraries.
- The `pybind11 <https://pybind11.readthedocs.io>`_ (>=2.6) header-only library
- The following Python modules:

  - `h5py <https://www.h5py.org/>`_
  - `psutil <https://psutil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_
  - `MPI4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`_
  - `NumPy <https://numpy.org>`_
  - `LoProp <https://pypi.org/project/LoProp/>`_
  - `geomeTRIC <https://github.com/leeping/geomeTRIC>`_

- If you plan to take advantage of our CMake-based build system, you will need CMake >=3.18

Optional, add-on dependencies:

  - `CPPE <https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe>`_
  - `XTB <https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb>`_

See :ref:`external-dependencies` for instructions on how to get these add-ons.

We recommend to always use a `virtual enviroment
<https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_, in order to avoid clashes
between dependencies.

CMake build options
+++++++++++++++++++

- You can set the C++ compiler with ``-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=<compiler-command>``.
- Enable architecture-dependent compiler flags: ``-DENABLE_ARCH_FLAGS=ON``. This
  will add ``-xHost`` (with Intel compilers) or ``-march=native`` (with
  GNU/Clang compilers) to the compiler flags.
- The build system recognizes the ``MKLROOT`` and ``OPENBLASROOT`` environment
  variables to compile and link against MKL and OpenBLAS, respectively. You can
  also set the linear algebra backend with the CMake option ``-DVLX_LA_VENDOR``.
  Valid options are:

  - ``MKL``, which links against the single dynamic library ``mkl_rt``.
  - ``OpenBLAS``, we recommend to use the OpenMP-threaded variant.
  - ``Cray``, to link against Cray's ``libsci``.
  - ``FLAME``, to use BLIS and libflame.
  - ``Apple``, to link against Apple's native BLAS/LAPACK implementations.


With Anaconda
+++++++++++++

`Anaconda <https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual>`_ and the software
packaged on the `conda-forge <https://conda-forge.org/>`_ channel provide build isolation and greatly simplify the installation of VeloxChem.

- Move to the folder containing the source code::

    $ cd veloxchem

- Create and activate the Conda environment::

    $ conda env create -f <environment_file>
    $ conda activate vlxenv

  This will create and activate a conda environment named ``vlxenv``. In this
  environment all the build dependencies will be installed from the ``conda-forge``
  channel, including the C++ compiler, MPI, `NumPy <https://numpy.org>`__, 
  `MPI4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`__, etc. We provide two
  options for the ``<environment_file>`` that specifies different linear algebra
  backend for your conda environment:

  - ``mkl_env.yml`` which installs the Intel Math Kernel Library,
  - ``openblas_env.yml`` which installs the OpenBLAS library.

  Note that the MPICH library will be installed by the ``yml`` file. If you prefer
  another MPI library such as OpenMPI, you can edit the ``yml`` file and replace
  ``mpich`` by ``openmpi``. Read more about the yml file in 
  `this page 
  <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#create-env-file-manually>`__.

- Build and install VeloxChem in the conda environment::

    $ python -m pip install .

  Configuration and build are driven by `scikit-build
  <https://scikit-build.readthedocs.io/>`_:

  - If CMake and Ninja are not available, they will be automatically installed
    when configuring.
  - By default, the build process will use *all* available cores to compile the
    C++ sources in parallel. This behavior can be controlled *via* the
    ``VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS`` environment variable::

      $ VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS=N python -m pip install .

    which will install VeloxChem using ``N`` cores.
  - You can set options for CMake as follows::

      $ CMAKE_ARGS="-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=mpicxx" python -m pip install .

- The environment now contains all that is necessary to run VeloxChem. You can deactivate it by
  ::

    $ conda deactivate

Cray platform (x86-64 or ARM processor)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- Load cray modules
  ::

    $ module swap PrgEnv-cray PrgEnv-gnu
    $ module load cray-python

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_
  ::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python -m pip install --upgrade pip

- Install `Mpi4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`_
  ::

    $ CC=cc MPICC=cc python3 -m pip install --no-deps --no-binary=mpi4py mpi4py

- Use the compiler wrapper to compile VeloxChem::

    $ cd veloxchem
    $ CXX=CC python3 -m pip install .

  This will also take care of installing the additional necessary Python modules.

  If you are installing VeloxChem on a HPC cluster, please run the compilation on an interactive node::

    $ salloc -N 1 ...
    $ CXX=CC VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS=N srun -n 1 python3 -m pip install .

  where ``N`` is the number of cores on the node.

Debian-based Linux
++++++++++++++++++

- Install Intel Math Kernel Library from `this page <https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/installing-intel-free-libs-and-python-apt-repo>`__. Note that this requires superuser privileges::

    $ wget https://apt.repos.intel.com/intel-gpg-keys/GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo apt-key add GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo sh -c 'echo deb https://apt.repos.intel.com/mkl all main > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/intel-mkl.list'
    $ sudo apt-get update
    $ sudo apt-get install intel-mkl-64bit-2019.1-053
    $ source /opt/intel/mkl/bin/mklvars.sh intel64

- Install MPI and Python::

    $ sudo apt-get install git mpich python3 python3-dev python3-pip python3-venv

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip wheel

- Install VeloxChem::

    $ python3 -m pip install git+https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

RPM-based Linux
+++++++++++++++

- Install Math Kernel Library from `this page <https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/installing-intel-free-libs-and-python-yum-repo>`__. Note that this requires superuser privileges::

    $ sudo yum install yum-utils
    $ sudo yum-config-manager --add-repo https://yum.repos.intel.com/mkl/setup/intel-mkl.repo
    $ sudo rpm --import https://yum.repos.intel.com/intel-gpg-keys/GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo yum install intel-mkl-64bit
    $ source /opt/intel/mkl/bin/mklvars.sh intel64

- Install MPI and Python::

    $ sudo yum install gcc gcc-g++ mpich mpich-devel python3 python3-devel python3-pip
    $ export PATH=/usr/lib64/mpich/bin:$PATH

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip wheel

- Install VeloxChem ::

    $ python3 -m pip install git+https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

PowerLinux
++++++++++

- See installation instructions `With Anaconda`_

macOS
+++++

- See installation instructions `With Anaconda`_

Windows
+++++++

- Soon to come!

External dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you wish to use functionality offered through interfaces with other software
packages, you will first need to install them.  Currently, interfaces to add-on
dependencies `XTB <https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb>`_ and `CPPE
<https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe>`_  are available.

The CPPE library for polarizable embedding
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There are few ways to install the CPPE library for polarizable embedding. Note
that you will need a C++ compiler compliant with th C++14 standard and CMake.

You can install it *via* ``pip`` in your virtual environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python -m pip install cppe

or as an extra during compilation of VeloxChem:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python -m pip install .[qmmm]

Alternatively, you can compile it without using ``pip``:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build CPPE
    $ git clone https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe
    $ cd cppe; mkdir build; cd build
    $ cmake -DENABLE_PYTHON_INTERFACE=ON ..
    $ make

    # Set up python path
    $ export PYTHONPATH=/path/to/your/cppe/build/stage/lib:$PYTHONPATH

    # Make sure that cppe can be imported
    $ python3 -c 'import cppe'


The XTB package for semiempirical methods
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is recommended to install the XTB package in a conda environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ conda install xtb -c conda-forge

Alternatively, you can compile it using ``cmake``:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build XTB
    $ git clone -b v6.3.3 https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb
    $ cd xtb
    $ cmake -S. -Bbuild -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/path/to/your/xtb
    $ cmake --build build --target install

    # Set XTBHOME prior to installing VeloxChem
    $ export XTBHOME=/path/to/your/xtb

.. [#f1] On Windows, this means using ``clang-cl``: the `Clang compiler front-end for MSVC <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html#clang-cl>`_

Commit message:

Update instructions for mpi4py installation on Cray machines
On Cray machines it is common practice for system administrators
to provide an mpi4py installation. This change updates the
installation instructions to reflect this.

docs/installation.rst, after:

Installation
============

Obtaining the source code
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The source code can be downloaded from the `GitLab repository <https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem>`_::

   $ git clone https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

Installing from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can build the code from sources on Linux, macOS, or Windows. On Linux and
macOS, you can use either `CMake <https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.18/>`_ or our
custom ``Makefile``-based build system.
For Windows, only the CMake-based build system will work.


Build prerequisites
+++++++++++++++++++

- Build tool: either ``make`` or `Ninja <https://ninja-build.org/>`_.
- C++ compiler fully compliant with the `C++17 standard <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/17>`_ and with full support for OpenMP >=4.5 [#f1]_
- Linear algebra libraries implementing the BLAS and LAPACK interfaces (*e.g.* 
  Intel MKL, OpenBLAS or Cray LibSci)
- MPI library (*e.g.* MPICH, Intel MPI or Open MPI)
- Installation of Python >=3.7 that includes the interpreter, the development
  header files, and the development libraries.
- The `pybind11 <https://pybind11.readthedocs.io>`_ (>=2.6) header-only library
- The following Python modules:

  - `h5py <https://www.h5py.org/>`_
  - `psutil <https://psutil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_
  - `MPI4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`_
  - `NumPy <https://numpy.org>`_
  - `LoProp <https://pypi.org/project/LoProp/>`_
  - `geomeTRIC <https://github.com/leeping/geomeTRIC>`_

- If you plan to take advantage of our CMake-based build system, you will need CMake >=3.18

Optional, add-on dependencies:

  - `CPPE <https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe>`_
  - `XTB <https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb>`_

See :ref:`external-dependencies` for instructions on how to get these add-ons.

We recommend to always use a `virtual enviroment
<https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_, in order to avoid clashes
between dependencies.

CMake build options
+++++++++++++++++++

- You can set the C++ compiler with ``-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=<compiler-command>``.
- Enable architecture-dependent compiler flags: ``-DENABLE_ARCH_FLAGS=ON``. This
  will add ``-xHost`` (with Intel compilers) or ``-march=native`` (with
  GNU/Clang compilers) to the compiler flags.
- The build system recognizes the ``MKLROOT`` and ``OPENBLASROOT`` environment
  variables to compile and link against MKL and OpenBLAS, respectively. You can
  also set the linear algebra backend with the CMake option ``-DVLX_LA_VENDOR``.
  Valid options are:

  - ``MKL``, which links against the single dynamic library ``mkl_rt``.
  - ``OpenBLAS``, we recommend to use the OpenMP-threaded variant.
  - ``Cray``, to link against Cray's ``libsci``.
  - ``FLAME``, to use BLIS and libflame.
  - ``Apple``, to link against Apple's native BLAS/LAPACK implementations.


With Anaconda
+++++++++++++

`Anaconda <https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual>`_ and the software
packaged on the `conda-forge <https://conda-forge.org/>`_ channel provide build isolation and greatly simplify the installation of VeloxChem.

- Move to the folder containing the source code::

    $ cd veloxchem

- Create and activate the Conda environment::

    $ conda env create -f <environment_file>
    $ conda activate vlxenv

  This will create and activate a conda environment named ``vlxenv``. In this
  environment all the build dependencies will be installed from the ``conda-forge``
  channel, including the C++ compiler, MPI, `NumPy <https://numpy.org>`__, 
  `MPI4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`__, etc. We provide two
  options for the ``<environment_file>`` that specifies different linear algebra
  backend for your conda environment:

  - ``mkl_env.yml`` which installs the Intel Math Kernel Library,
  - ``openblas_env.yml`` which installs the OpenBLAS library.

  Note that the MPICH library will be installed by the ``yml`` file. If you prefer
  another MPI library such as OpenMPI, you can edit the ``yml`` file and replace
  ``mpich`` by ``openmpi``. Read more about the yml file in 
  `this page 
  <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#create-env-file-manually>`__.

- Build and install VeloxChem in the conda environment::

    $ python -m pip install .

  Configuration and build are driven by `scikit-build
  <https://scikit-build.readthedocs.io/>`_:

  - If CMake and Ninja are not available, they will be automatically installed
    when configuring.
  - By default, the build process will use *all* available cores to compile the
    C++ sources in parallel. This behavior can be controlled *via* the
    ``VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS`` environment variable::

      $ VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS=N python -m pip install .

    which will install VeloxChem using ``N`` cores.
  - You can set options for CMake as follows::

      $ CMAKE_ARGS="-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=mpicxx" python -m pip install .

- The environment now contains all that is necessary to run VeloxChem. You can deactivate it by
  ::

    $ conda deactivate

Cray platform (x86-64 or ARM processor)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- Load cray modules
  ::

    $ module swap PrgEnv-cray PrgEnv-gnu
    $ module load cray-python

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_
  ::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv --system-site-packages
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python -m pip install --upgrade pip

- Verify mpi4py installation on a compute node. For more information see `Mpi4Py <https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io/>`_
  ::

    $ srun -n 2 python -c "from mpi4py import MPI;print(f'hello from rank {MPI.COMM_WORLD.Get_rank()}')"

  If your system administrator has provided mpi4py then this mpi4py version of "hello world" should print ``hello from rank n`` from each MPI rank.

  If the system you are running on does not provide the mpi4py package you can also install it manually.
  For this to work you must use the Cray compiler wrappers.::

    $ CC=cc MPICC=cc python3 -m pip install --no-deps --no-binary=mpi4py mpi4py

- Use the compiler wrapper to compile VeloxChem::

    $ cd veloxchem
    $ CXX=CC python3 -m pip install .

  This will also take care of installing the additional necessary Python modules.

  If you are installing VeloxChem on a HPC cluster, please run the compilation on an interactive node::

    $ salloc -N 1 ...
    $ CXX=CC VLX_NUM_BUILD_JOBS=N srun -n 1 python3 -m pip install .

  where ``N`` is the number of cores on the node.

Debian-based Linux
++++++++++++++++++

- Install Intel Math Kernel Library from `this page <https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/installing-intel-free-libs-and-python-apt-repo>`__. Note that this requires superuser privileges::

    $ wget https://apt.repos.intel.com/intel-gpg-keys/GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo apt-key add GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo sh -c 'echo deb https://apt.repos.intel.com/mkl all main > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/intel-mkl.list'
    $ sudo apt-get update
    $ sudo apt-get install intel-mkl-64bit-2019.1-053
    $ source /opt/intel/mkl/bin/mklvars.sh intel64

- Install MPI and Python::

    $ sudo apt-get install git mpich python3 python3-dev python3-pip python3-venv

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip wheel

- Install VeloxChem::

    $ python3 -m pip install git+https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

RPM-based Linux
+++++++++++++++

- Install Math Kernel Library from `this page <https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/installing-intel-free-libs-and-python-yum-repo>`__. Note that this requires superuser privileges::

    $ sudo yum install yum-utils
    $ sudo yum-config-manager --add-repo https://yum.repos.intel.com/mkl/setup/intel-mkl.repo
    $ sudo rpm --import https://yum.repos.intel.com/intel-gpg-keys/GPG-PUB-KEY-INTEL-SW-PRODUCTS-2019.PUB
    $ sudo yum install intel-mkl-64bit
    $ source /opt/intel/mkl/bin/mklvars.sh intel64

- Install MPI and Python::

    $ sudo yum install gcc gcc-g++ mpich mpich-devel python3 python3-devel python3-pip
    $ export PATH=/usr/lib64/mpich/bin:$PATH

- Create and activate a `virtual enviroment <https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html>`_::

    $ python3 -m venv vlxenv
    $ source vlxenv/bin/activate
    $ python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip wheel

- Install VeloxChem ::

    $ python3 -m pip install git+https://gitlab.com/veloxchem/veloxchem

PowerLinux
++++++++++

- See installation instructions `With Anaconda`_

macOS
+++++

- See installation instructions `With Anaconda`_

Windows
+++++++

- Soon to come!

External dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you wish to use functionality offered through interfaces with other software
packages, you will first need to install them.  Currently, interfaces to add-on
dependencies `XTB <https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb>`_ and `CPPE
<https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe>`_  are available.

The CPPE library for polarizable embedding
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

There are few ways to install the CPPE library for polarizable embedding. Note
that you will need a C++ compiler compliant with th C++14 standard and CMake.

You can install it *via* ``pip`` in your virtual environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python -m pip install cppe

or as an extra during compilation of VeloxChem:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python -m pip install .[qmmm]

Alternatively, you can compile it without using ``pip``:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build CPPE
    $ git clone https://github.com/maxscheurer/cppe
    $ cd cppe; mkdir build; cd build
    $ cmake -DENABLE_PYTHON_INTERFACE=ON ..
    $ make

    # Set up python path
    $ export PYTHONPATH=/path/to/your/cppe/build/stage/lib:$PYTHONPATH

    # Make sure that cppe can be imported
    $ python3 -c 'import cppe'


The XTB package for semiempirical methods
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

It is recommended to install the XTB package in a conda environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ conda install xtb -c conda-forge

Alternatively, you can compile it using ``cmake``:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Build XTB
    $ git clone -b v6.3.3 https://github.com/grimme-lab/xtb
    $ cd xtb
    $ cmake -S. -Bbuild -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/path/to/your/xtb
    $ cmake --build build --target install

    # Set XTBHOME prior to installing VeloxChem
    $ export XTBHOME=/path/to/your/xtb

.. [#f1] On Windows, this means using ``clang-cl``: the `Clang compiler front-end for MSVC <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html#clang-cl>`_
